

 belonging to the SC, ST, 
OBC and minorities will be appointed as judges of the 
High Courts and the Supreme Court.
6. Congress will establish a Judicial Complaints 
Commission consisting of retired judges of the 
Supreme Court and retired Chief Justices of the High 
Courts to investigate complaints of misconduct 
against judges of the higher judiciary.
24

ANTI-CORRUPTION
In the last 10 years, we have seen that several measures taken by the BJP/NDA government were actually 
a cloak for corruption. Some examples are demonetisation, the Rafale deal, Pegasus spyware, and the 
Electoral Bonds scheme. Congress will probe these dubious deals and schemes and bring to law those 
who made illegal gains through these measures.
Known offenders were allowed to leave the country in the last 10 years. The BJP/NDA government is 
perceived to have facilitated their leaving the country and has not been able to bring back any of the 
scamsters. The circumstances under which they were allowed to leave the country will be probed and all 
scamsters and their accomplices will be brought before the law.
The BJP has turned out to be a giant washing machine. Accused in registered cases who joined the BJP 
were allowed to escape the law. The allegations against such persons will be revived and investigated.
25

1. Congress will guarantee artistic freedom. We will 
oppose censorship. Attempts by vigilante groups to 
censor or intimidate artists will be dealt with firmly and 
according to law.
2. Congress will commit resources and attention to 
sustaining India’s living traditions, especially to the 
flourishing of our distinct indigenous cultures.
3. We will empower the artisan economy and promote 
crafts-based enterprises.
4. Congress will ensure the autonomy of national 
cultural institutions, including financial autonomy. These 
institutions will be administered by renowned artists 
and experts in the field.
5. We will promote art education in schools and 
colleges, and support institutions that exclusively teach 
the arts.
6. We will intensify the efforts to retrieve India’s stolen 
art and also support private efforts.
7. Congress will support government and private 
efforts to establish museums, art galleries, libraries 
and archives. This will include smaller institutions at 
the district level, which are the repositories of local 
knowledge about artists, artisans, folk culture and 
communities. We will support measures to create 
digital archives.
8. We will work with state governments to build a 
national network of libraries. We will support mobile 
and community libraries.
9. We will ensure that the National Mission on Monu-
ments and Antiquities is revitalised. The Archaeologi-
cal Survey of India will be provided more funds and 
human resources.
10. We will offer grants for the translation of traditional 
and contemporary expressions of Indian culture into 
Indian and foreign languages to foster national integra-
tion and Indian soft power abroad.
11. We will review and strengthen the Copyright Act, 
1957.
ART, CULTURE
AND
HERITAGE
Art, culture and heritage constitute the 
identity of a people. The BJP/NDA 
government has focused on looking at 
culture through the lens of politics and 
ideology, while the actual practitioners, 
practices and institutions of culture have 
been neglected or actively undermined. 
Congress is committed to protect the 
rich diversity of India’s art and culture 
and to ensure they thrive in an atmo-
sphere of freedom and creativity.
26

ECONOMY
Our Economic Policy
Economic justice is as important as political and social justice. Sound economic policies will ensure that India, a 
developing country, will attain the status of, first, a middle-income country and, then, a developed country. 
Congress’ economic policy has evolved over the years. In 1991, the Congress ushered in the era of liberalization and 
steered the country toward an open, free and competitive economy with regulatory oversight. The country reaped 
enormous benefits in terms of wealth-creation, new businesses and entrepreneurs, a huge middle class, millions of 
jobs, important innovations in education and healthcare, and exports. Millions of people were lifted out of poverty. We 
reiterate our commitment to an open economy in which economic growth will be driven by the private sector comple-
mented by a strong and viable public sector.
TIME FOR A RE-SET
After 33 years, the time is ripe for a re-set of economic 
policy. We need a Nav Sankalp Economic Policy. The 
cornerstone of the Nav Sankalp Economic Policy will 
be JOBS. To create jobs, India must become a 
producing economy. We must produce goods and 
services for ourselves and for the world. There is a 
huge opportunity for India to emerge as the world’s 
biggest producer.
We reject jobless growth and the BJP’s legacy of 
job-loss growth. We will address the issues of inflation; 
extreme poverty among a significant section of the 
people; hunger; nutritional deficiency among women 
and children; and the growing inequalities of income 
and wealth.
The three goals of our economic policy were, and will 
be, work, wealth and welfare.
WORK
Work means there will be plenty of jobs and sufficient opportunities for self-employment and starting businesses.
1. We will create thousands of jobs as outlined in the 
next chapter. The best creator of jobs is the private 
sector. In particular, the MSME sector is the creator of 
the largest number of jobs, especially for workers with 
average education and average skills.
2. We will support the private sector and every kind of 
enterprise — large, medium, small and micro — in their 
endeavour to create jobs and produce goods and 
services.
3. We will remove the current environment of distrust 
and fear, and create a healthy eco-system where 
private enterprises, regulatory authorities, tax authori-
ties and government will work in a spirit of mutual 
cooperation and respect.
4. We will protect innovation and intellectual property 
rights, provide access to finances, and ensure the 
freedom to produce and sell anywhere in India or 
abroad.
27

5. We will support free trade and rule-based internation-
al trade and commerce.
6. We will encourage and participate in bilateral and 
multilateral trade agreements.
7. Regulatory oversight will be based on clearly enunci-
ated laws and rules that will be applied fairly and 
without discrimination.
8. We will ensure a level playing field for all.
9. We are opposed to monopolies and oligopolies and 
crony capitalism.
10. We will ensure that no company or person arrogates 
to itself or himself the financial or material resources or 
the business opportunities or the concessions that 
ought to be available to every entrepreneur.
11. Our policy preference will be in favour of business 
enterprises that create a large number of jobs.
12. Full employment is our goal and we will make every 
effort to ensure that the large workforce is gainfully 
employed.
13. We will introduce reforms in industrial and labour 
laws to restore the balance between labour and capital 
to meet our twin goals of full employment and high 
productivity gains. The Labour Codes passed by the 
BJP/NDA government will be reviewed and amended.
14. We will address the issues of gender discrimination 
and gender inequality in workplaces and in accessing 
economic opportunities.
15. We will ensure that banks offer low-interest loans 
to Self-Help Groups.
16. Congress will undertake a comprehensive review of 
various charges levied by banks, stop the exploitation 
of customers, and rationalize the charges for bank 
services.
17. We will launch an urban employment programme 
guaranteeing work for the urban poor in reconstruction 
and renewal of urban infrastructure.
18. We will make a law to specify and protect the rights 
of gig workers and unorganised workers and enhance 
their social security.
19. We will propose laws to regulate the employment 
of domestic help and migrant workers, and ensure their 
basic legal rights.
20. We will reorient the tax policies towards employ-
ment and wages as well as investments and profits.
21. We will address the growing inequality of wealth 
and income through suitable changes in policies.
28

WEALTH
Wealth and wealth creation are the goals of any business. 
Industrial and business policies and regulations will be 
designed to facilitate the production of goods and services in 
larger volumes and higher values. While production is import-
ant, productivity is equally important. Any impediment, legal 
or administrative, to larger production or higher value will be 
removed. We will facilitate access to finances, raw materials, 
technology, intellectual property, and other resources both 
from within India and through imports. Business enterprises 
will have the liberty to sell goods and services within India or 
through exports. All laws and rules that inhibit free and fair 
trade will be reviewed and changed.
India’s GDP in 1990-91 was approximately 25 lakh crore in 
constant prices. In 13 years, first under a Congress govern-
ment and later under coalition governments, the GDP doubled 
and reached a value of 50 lakh crore in 2003-04. In 10 years 
under the UPA, the economy doubled again and the GDP was 
at 100 lakh crore in 2013-14. A 100 lakh crore economy 
was inherited by the BJP/NDA government but it wasted the 
golden opportunity. If the UPA had continued in office, the 
economy would have doubled again and stood at 200 lakh 
crore in 2023-24. Alas, due to the BJP’s mismanagement, the 
GDP will reach a level of only 173 lakh crore by the end of 
2023-24 falling short of a target that was unachievable.
The Congress is committed to rapid growth and generation of 
wealth. We have set a target of doubling the GDP in the next 
10 years.
WELFARE
Welfare of all is the goal of all work and the creation of wealth. Owing to the skewed policies of the BJP/NDA, the 
people of India are divided in economic terms. There is a small class of very rich, a substantial middle class, a large 
segment of people above the poverty line but not yet the middle class, and nearly 22 crore people who are poor. 
Under a Congress government, the welfare of the poor will be the first charge on all government resources. It will be 
the Congress’ endeavour to ensure that the 22 crore people below the poverty line are lifted above the line in the next 
10 years; that they are able to enjoy the fruits of education, healthcare, housing, drinking water, sanitation, electricity 
and, above all, opportunities for jobs/work; and are made strong and self-reliant to compete with others who are 
higher on the economic ladder.
As people move up the economic ladder, their needs are for better infrastructure and better goods and services. 
Besides, we must get the Indian economy and the Indian work force ‘future-ready’. The challenges of the future 
include the changes in the global economy, advanced technology such as Artificial Intelligence, robotics and machine 
learning, and climate change. The future of our energy is Green Energy. We will mobilize the massive capital required 
for our green energy transition.
The Nav Sankalp Economic Policy will aim to build a fair, just and equal-opportunity economy and bring prosperity to 
all sections of the people. Congress will herald a new beginning, just as we did in 1991, involving all sections of the 
people in nation-building. The time has become to re-set and re-prioritize our roadmap for economic development in 
the context of the twin challenges to our economy, namely, UNEMPLOYMENT and INFLATION.
We have made specific promises in different sections of this Manifesto. By implementing these promises, we hope to 
achieve the paramount goal of ushering in a fair, just and equitable economy that will make India a rich country, and 
that will be resilient to adapt to a changing world.
29

The most challenging issue today is widespread 
unemployment. The cry everywhere is for jobs. 
The unemployment rate ranges from 10 per cent 
(for age 15-29) to 42.3 per cent (for graduates 
under age 25) to 9.8 per cent (for graduates of 
age 30-34). No one has any faith in the BJP which 
deceived the people with the false claim that it 
will create 2 crore jobs a year. The BJP/NDA 
government’s response to the grave problem was 
to abandon labour force surveys, distort data and 
pretend that the problem does not exist. We 
acknowledge the problem and we promise to 
create millions of jobs through concrete initia-
tives:
UNEMPLOYMENT –
MEETING THE CRY
FOR JOBS
1.Fill the nearly 30 lakh vacancies in sanctioned posts 
at various levels in the central government, teaching and 
non-teaching posts in central educational institutions, 
posts of doctors, nurses, paramedics and other support-
ing staff in central government medical institutions, and 
vacancies in the Central Armed Police Forces (CAPF).
2. Publish a job calendar for each department, institu-
tion and public body with details of vacancies and the 
timelines to fill the vacancies.
3. Abolish the Agnipath programme and direct the 
Armed Forces (Army, Navy, Air Force and Coast Guard) 
to resume normal recruitment to achieve the full sanc-
tioned strength.
4. Appoint a second ASHA worker in all villages with a 
population exceeding 2,500 persons.
5. Double the number of Anganwadi workers and create 
an additional 14 lakh jobs.
6. Create a new employment-linked incentive (ELI) 
Scheme for corporates to win tax credits for additional 
hiring against regular, quality jobs.
7. Launch a strategic mining programme to explore and 
mine rare earths and critical minerals with the object of 
increasing the share of mining to 5 per cent of GDP and 
creating 1.5 crore jobs for unskilled and skilled workers 
in the mineral-rich states.
The programme will be implemented consistent with 
stringent environmental and labour safety standards.
8. We will launch an urban employment programme 
guaranteeing work for the urban poor in reconstruction 
and renewal of urban infrastructure.
9. Provide jobs for low-education, low-skilled youth by 
launching a Water Bodies Restoration Programme and 
a Wasteland Regeneration Programme that will be 
implemented through village panchayats and munici-
palities.
10. Establish an autonomous non-profit society 
involving the state governments, universities and 
business organisations to establish at least one Skills 
Training Institute in each district to impart skills 
through short- and long-term courses to youth in the 
age group of 18-29 years. Incentivise corporates to use 
CSR funds for skill training in recognised skill training 
institutes.
11. Incentivise panchayats to establish and maintain 
solar grids that will generate power for common 
purposes and create jobs at the panchayats level.
12. Amend the laws to make workplaces safer for 
women workers and with facilities for care of small 
children. Facilitate travel to such workplaces.
30

1. Congress will enact a Direct Taxes Code that will 
usher in an era of transparency, equity, clarity and 
impartial tax administration of direct taxes.
2. Congress will maintain stable personal income tax 
rates throughout its term. This will ensure that the 
salaried class is not subjected to rising tax rates and 
have clarity to plan their finances over the medi-
um-to-long period.
3. We will eliminate “Angel tax” and all other exploitative 
tax schemes that inhibit investment in new micro, small 
companies and innovative start-ups.
4. Congress will lessen the burden of tax on MSMEs 
owned by individuals and partnership firms.
5. We will end the duplicitous “cess” raj of the Modi 
government to deny states their rightful share of tax 
revenues by introducing a law to limit Union cess and 
surcharges to 5 per cent of gross tax revenues.
6. Congress will replace the GST laws enacted by the 
BJP/NDA government with GST 2.0. The new GST 
regime will be based on the universally accepted 
principle that GST shall be a single, moderate rate (with 
a few exceptions) that will not burden the poor.
7. GST will not be levied on agricultural inputs.
8. The GST Council will be re-designed. It will be the 
final authority on policy and on all matters relating to 
GST.
9. The administration of GST laws will be divided 
horizontally between the central government and the 
state governments. Small GST-payers below a thresh-
old will come under the purview of the state govern-
ments.
10. A portion of GST revenues will be allocated to 
pnchayats and municipalities.
11. Shopkeepers and small retail businesses that face 
intense competition from online businesses will be 
given significant tax relief.
12. The Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (ITAT), the 
Goods and Services Tax Appellate Tribunal (GSTAT) 
and the Customs Appellate Tribunal (CESTAT) will be 
autonomous judicial bodies without interference by the 
government.
TAXATION AND
TAX REFORMS
Taxation forms the core of governance. The 
last ten years of the BJP/NDA government is a 
case of “taxation gone berserk”. The share of 
taxes paid by the common person and the poor 
through regressive indirect taxes has increased 
significantly and the share of taxes paid by 
corporates has decreased – the exact opposite 
of what a people-friendly and progressive 
taxation policy should be. Despite the tall 
claims of increasing the tax base through 
demonetistion and GST, India’s overall tax to 
GDP has not increased in the last decade, 
leaving very little room for increased expendi-
ture. Congress will undertake a complete 
overhaul of India’s taxation system to make it 
people-friendly and efficient, and to incentivise 
private savings and investment.
31

INDUSTRY
In order to become a developed economy and create good quality jobs for hundreds of thousands of youth, it 
is critical that India transitions from a consumer economy to a producer economy. India must become a 
manufacturing powerhouse that produces goods and services for itself and the world. To this end, beyond 
economic and business factors, the most vital ingredient is social harmony that will attract investments and 
a skilled labour force. It is thus no surprise that in the last 25 years, India’s manufacturing share of GDP has 
been higher during the Congress rule. On the contrary, in the last 10 years (2014-24), the share of manufac-
turing has stagnated at 14 per cent.
1. Congress resolves to make India a manufacturing 
hub by raising the share of manufacturing from 14 per 
cent to 20 per cent of GDP in the next five years.
2. The most immediate objective will be to restore a 
healthy, fearless and a trustworthy climate for business-
es. While a Congress government in 1991 abolished 
industrial licensing and controls, the independent 
regulatory regime that was put in place has deteriorated 
into a system of overt and covert controls. We will 
conduct a comprehensive review of the current rules 
and regulations and repeal or amend them in order to 
restore freedom to industry, business and trade.
3. Congress will aim for India attaining a position of 
leadership in multiple industries such as steel, metals, 
garments and textiles, cement, automobiles, electronic 
goods, pharmaceuticals, engineering goods, petroleum 
products, chemicals, and mining rare earths and critical 
minerals.
4. According to the RBI, nearly 60 per cent of the large 
central government projects have been stalled or 
delayed and costs have risen by nearly 5 lakh crores. 
Congress will address the problem in a mission-mode 
and find ways and means to revive the stalled projects 
with the help of the private sector.
5. Congress will reform the production-linked incen-
tives (PLI) scheme to target specific sectors that can 
create thousands of jobs by making India one of the 
top 5 producers in the world in that sector.
6. We will introduce a new employment-linked incentive 
(ELI) Scheme for corporates to win tax credits for 
additional hiring against regular, quality jobs.
7. We will give the highest priority to intellectual 
property rights and to the registration, acquisition, 
protection and use of IPR in small, medium and large 
businesses.
8. Congress will create a level playing field for all 
businesses. We are opposed to monopolies and 
oligopolies. We will strengthen the Competition Com-
mission of India in order to ensure that India will be an 
open and competitive economy.
9. Congress will simplify the corporate taxation struc-
ture and end tax terrorism. We will restrain the investi-
gating agencies from misusing their powers to reward 
or punish corporates and ensure that they act within 
the strict limits of the law.
10. We will encourage and support the use of Artificial 
Intelligence, robotics, etc. which will create new and 
frontline jobs. At the same time, we will ensure that 
there are more job opportunities in sectors that use 
conventional technology.
32

1. Congress will mobilize public and private capital, 
increase the pace of construction, and augment infra-
structure. The focus will be on design, quality, speed of 
implementation, maintenance and accountability.
2. Private capital must be attracted to create public 
assets and infrastructure. The BJP/NDA government 
has inverted this model and is using public money to 
create assets that eventually find their way into private 
hands. Congress will stop this loot of public money.
3. We will modernise the outdated railway infrastructure 
but in doing so we will ensure that trains and stations 
serve the needs of the common people and commuters. 
The railway services and facilities available to the poor 
and middle classes will be continued. 
4. KAVACH, an anti-collision device, was developed 
during the term of the UPA. KAVACH will be installed in 
all train engines and routes to improve passenger safety 
on Indian railways.
5. Transport facilities and connectivity between rural 
areas and the nearby town/city will be augmented so 
that people may live in rural areas and work in urban 
areas.
6. Congress will implement a comprehensive plan for 
multi-modal urban public transport.
7. Road tolls are perceived by the road-users as 
excessive and exploitative. The policy on Road Tolls 
will be reviewed and formulae will be applied to deter-
mine the toll amount and the period of levy for each 
stretch of the road.
8. A regulatory regime for ports and airports will be 
established to promote efficiency and competition 
among ports/airports.
9. We will promote green energy. We will implement 
renewable energy schemes that will make the
panchayats or municipality self-sufficient in electricity 
as far as possible. We will promote solar-powered 
engines for tapping groundwater for agriculture.
10. We will ensure that modern scientific methods for 
exploration and extraction of natural resources are 
followed to protect and preserve the local environment 
and communities. Representatives from the concerned 
panchayat or municipality will be consulted before 
undertaking such projects.
INFRASTRUCTURE
The hardware of an economy are roads, railways, 
ports, airports and electricity. Capital expenditure 
and modern technology have to be mobilized to 
create infrastructure of world class quality. A 
variety of models of building infrastructure must be 
adopted according to the needs of the economy.
33

34

FEDERALISM
Centre-State Relations
Federalism is the foundational principle of ‘India is a 
Union of States’. India’s fabric of federalism stitched 
together by mutual trust between the Union and States 
has been systematically destroyed by the BJP/NDA 
government. Congress affirms its belief that India 
cannot be administered by the central government 
alone. In most matters concerning the daily lives of the 
people, it is the state government that is close to the 
people and, in some matters, it is the local government 
(panchayats or municipality) that is closer to the people.
1. We will review the distribution of legislative fields in 
the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution and build a 
consensus on transferring some fields from List III 
(Concurrent List) to List II (State List).
2. India is one and many at the same time. Its unity gets 
strengthened when its diversities are accommodated 
and celebrated. This has always been Congress’ stance 
and will remain so. Article 1 of the Constitution begins 
with the words “India, that is Bharat, shall be a Union of 
States.” This is the guiding principle of federalism in our 
country. 
3. Congress will end the duplicitous “cess” raj of the 
BJP/NDA government to deny states their rightful share 
of tax revenues. We will introduce a law to limit Union 
cess and surcharges to 5 per cent of gross tax 
revenues.
4. We will instruct the Finance Commission to take into 
account factors such as demographic performance and 
tax efforts in determining the shares of states in the 
devolution of central tax revenues. We will work with 
state governments to evolve a formula to devolve funds, 
including a share of GST revenues, directly to pancha-
yats and municipalities. 
5. Taking into account rapid urbanisation, we will amend 
the laws to grant more executive, financial and adminis-
trative powers to the directly-elected Mayor/Chairperson 
for effective governance in urban local bodies. The 
administration will be accountable to the Mayor/Chair-
person and the Council.
6. Congress, as the author of the 73rd and 74th Consti-
tution Amendments, will prevail upon the states to 
implement those provisions in letter and spirit and 
devolve funds, functions and functionaries upon the 
panchayat and municipality.
35

7. Congress will enhance the role and authority of Gram 
Sabhas in matters concerning village panchayats. We 
will enhance the authority of the Gram Sabha in the 
administration of the following Acts:
  (a.) The Panchayats (Extension to Scheduled Areas) 
Act, 1996.
  (b.) The Forest Rights Act, 2006.
  (c.) The Land Acquisition Act, 2013.
8. Congress will enhance financial assistance to the 
Autonomous District Councils in the North Eastern 
states.
9. We will immediately restore full statehood to Jammu 
and Kashmir. We will amend the Sixth Schedule of the 
Constitution to include the tribal areas of Ladakh.
10. We will give Special Category status to Andhra 
Pradesh as promised on 20 February 2014.
11. We will amend the Government of National Capital 
Territory of Delhi Act, 1991 and declare that the 
Lieutenant Governor shall act on the aid and advice of 
the Council of Ministers of NCT, Delhi on all matters, 
including Services, except on matters concerning the 
three reserved subjects.
12. We will grant full statehood to Puducherry.
1. For rural areas, Congress will pass the Right to 
Homestead Act, extend the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak 
Yojana to all villages and habitations, and increase the 
funds to and quicken the pace of implementation of the 
National Drinking Water Mission.
2. We will increase the wage under MGNREGA to 400 
per day. MGNREGA funds and workers may also be 
deployed to build public assets such as classrooms, 
libraries and primary health centres.
3. We will launch an urban employment programme 
guaranteeing work for the urban poor in reconstruction 
and renewal of urban infrastructure.
4. To regulate the mindless expansion of existing 
cities, Congress will support the construction of a twin 
city near an existing city but separated by a clear green 
and no-construction zone between the old and new 
cities.
5. To improve urban governance, the Mayor/Chairper-
son will be directly elected for a fixed term of 5 years 
along with a Council. Executive, financial and adminis-
trative powers will be conferred upon the Mayor/Chair-
person. The administration will be accountable to the 
Mayor/Chairperson and the Council.
6. Transport facilities and connectivity between rural 
areas and the nearby town/city will be augmented so 
that people may live in rural areas and work in urban 
areas.
Some issues like livelihoods, housing, water, electricity, habitat, pollution, climate change, transport and disaster 
management are common to both rural and urban areas.
The two realities that India faces are (1) that nearly 60 per 
cent of the people live in rural areas and (2) urbanisation is 
taking place rapidly. Hence, we have to pay equal attention 
to rural development and urban development, and provide 
adequate infrastructure in our villages and towns/cities.
RURAL AND URBAN
DEVELOPMENT
36

1. We will assess the infrastructure deficit in the North 
Eastern states and provide more funds for building 
infrastructure. 
2. We will support Border Trade and make every effort 
to increase the volume and value of such trade.
3. Congress will revive the Autonomous District Coun-
cils (ADCs) in the North Eastern states and make them 
an effective instrument of local government. We will 
ensure that more funds are channelised through the 
ADCs for developmental works.
4. We will ensure that tea garden workers receive fair 
wages and other benefits in accordance with the 
applicable laws and agreements. 
5. The situation in Manipur has gone from bad to 
worse due to the callous neglect of the BJP/NDA 
government. Congress will remove the present state 
government forthwith and heal the wounds between 
the communities. We will appoint a Reconciliation 
Commission to bring about a political and administra-
tive settlement that will be satisfactory to all the people 
of the state.
6. We will ensure appropriate compensation and 
redress for the victims and survivors of the conflict in 
Manipur.
7. A final solution and agreement will be entered into 
with the Naga groups on the basis of the preliminary 
agreement that had been agreed in 2013-14.
7. Congress will implement a comprehensive plan for 
multi-modal urban public transport.
8. Travel/transport will be made safer for women and 
children, especially in towns and cities.
9. The menace of stray dogs has acquired alarming 
proportions. Solutions will be found that will protect 
humans (especially children) and that are consistent 
with a humanitarian approach to animals.
10. We will prevail upon the states to implement the 
73rd and 74th Amendment to the Constitution in letter 
and spirit and ensure that funds, functions and 
functionaries are devolved upon the panchayats and 
municipalities.
NORTH
EASTERN
STATES
The North Eastern states within the 
Union of India represent the pluralism 
and diversity of India. We are proud that 
we are a diverse country that is home to 
many races, religions and languages.
37

1.The absence of a formal National Security Strategy 
has led to ad hoc and personalised policymaking.
After detailed deliberations, Congress will issue a 
comprehensive National Security Strategy.
2. The Raksha Mantri’s Operational Directive determines 
the Armed Forces’ war planning. The UPA government 
issued the last directive in 2009. Congress will bring a 
new Operational Directive to deal with our current 
two-front challenge.
3. The Chief of Defence Staff (CDS) is a sensitive and 
crucial post for military reform, preparedness and joint 
operations. Congress will institutionalise the process of 
appointing the CDS to ensure transparency and military 
consensus.
4. We will reverse the decline in defence expenditure as 
a proportion of total expenditure and will ensure that 
sufficient funds are allocated and spent to meet the 
requirements of the Armed Forces.
5. Congress will scrap the Agnipath Scheme and return 
to the normal recruitment processes followed by the 
Army, Navy and Air Force that will guarantee economic 
and social security for our soldiers.
6. Congress will systematically expand the opportuni-
ties for women to serve in combatant and non-combat-
ant roles in the Armed Forces.
7. The National Security Council (NSC) and the office 
of National Security Adviser (NSA) will be brought 
under the oversight of a select committee of Parlia-
ment.
8. The concept of national security in the 21st century 
has expanded beyond defence of the territory to 
include hybrid warfare, data security, cyber security, 
financial security, communication security and security 
of trade routes. Congress will evolve suitable policies 
to address each of these subjects.
NATIONAL 
SECURITY
Defence
The Chinese intrusions in Ladakh and the Galwan clash in 2020 represented the biggest setbacks to Indian national 
security in decades. On 19 June 2020, PM Narendra Modi gave a clean chit to China that considerably weakened our 
negotiating position. Despite 21 rounds of military-level talks, Chinese troops continue to occupy Indian territory and 
deny Indian forces access to 26 out of 65 patrolling points, equivalent to an area of 2,000 square km in eastern 
Ladakh. A Chinese buildup in Doklam threatens the Siliguri Corridor that connects northeast India with the rest of the 
country.
38

9. Congress will establish a National Economic 
Security Board under the NSC with the following objec-
tives:
   (a.) to monitor possible risks to global supply chain 
disruptions and suggest counter actions;
  (b.) to suggest measures to reduce over-dependence 
on large import sources;
  (c.) to recommend future courses of action toward 
inward and outward investments that will strengthen 
India's footprint in the world;
  (d.) to monitor global financial flows and identify 
potential threats to India, along with actions required to 
mitigate them in advance; and
  (e.) to work on digital/cybersecurity issues that may 
threaten India's digital financial infrastructure. 
10. We will rapidly expand domestic capacity to 
manufacture defence and security hardware and 
equipment.
11. One Rank One Pension (OROP) will be implemented 
in accordance with the order of the UPA government 
dated 26 February 2014. Anomalies that have arisen in 
the implementation of OROP by the BJP/NDA govern-
ment will be rectified. We will restore the disability 
pension and make it tax-free.
INTERNAL
SECURITY
In the aftermath of the Mumbai terror attacks in 
2008, Congress revamped the internal security 
system and implemented a number of radical 
measures. Distressingly, gaps have emerged in 
the system. Besides, the increase in hate 
speeches, hate crimes and communal strife 
has compounded the situation.
1.Congress will put down with a firm hand hate speech-
es, hate crimes and communal conflicts. According to 
NCRB data, crimes against women, SC, ST and minori-
ties have increased. We will identify the perpetrators of 
such crimes as well as their sponsors and punish them 
in accordance with law.
2. Congress is firmly opposed to extra-judicial illegal 
measures like mob lynching, police encounter killings 
and bulldozer justice. We will stop them immediately 
and punish the perpetrators in accordance with law.
3. The unfinished agenda of the 2008 reforms are:
     •NATGRID and
     •National Counter-Terrorism Centre.
Congress will take up the two subjects, complete the 
work, and operationalise them within one year.
4. The State police is the first responder to threats to 
internal security. Congress will work with State govern-
ments to build, train and equip the State police forces 
to maintain law and order and to punish offenders 
without fear or favour.
5. Trafficking and selling of drugs will be put down with 
a firm hand. Increasingly, ports are used to smuggle 
drugs. The regulatory and penal provisions will be 
strengthened, and drug smugglers and traffickers, and 
their accomplices, will be dealt with sternly in accor-
dance with law.
6. The strength of the Central Armed Police Forces 
(CAPF) will be augmented and modernized. Our goal is 
that 33 per cent of these forces will be made up of 
women. The Service Rules will be revised and updated. 
The forces will be deployed having regard to the needs 
of training, rest and recuperation.
7. We will fill the vacancies in the CAPF and achieve 
the full sanctioned strength.
39

FOREIGN POLICY
1. Congress affirms and will uphold continuity in India’s 
foreign policy. Our approach was profoundly shaped by 
the freedom movement and developed through the 
wisdom of visionary leaders like Jawaharlal Nehru.
2. There was a consensus on foreign policy since 
Independence. Unfortunately, in many areas, foreign 
policy under the BJP/NDA government has witnessed 
marked departures from this consensus, notably on the 
ongoing Gaza conflict. Congress pledges to restore 
India’s global reputation as a voice of peace and moder-
ation in world affairs.
3. Congress re-affirms its firm belief in the continued 
relevance of the established policy of peaceful co-exis-
tence, strategic autonomy in thought and action, and 
increased bilateral engagement in its relations with the 
countries of the world.
4. We will work to strengthen India’s role in multilateral 
institutions, co-ordinate positions with other countries 
of the Global South on vital issues, and continue to work 
for reform and empowerment of international organisa-
tions to deal with the major challenges that transcend 
borders.
5. Enhanced foreign trade will be an important element 
of our foreign policy and we will make every effort to 
conclude long-pending trade negotiations with other 
countries in the interests of Indian producers and 
consumers.
6. Congress is implacably opposed to terrorism 
anywhere in the world. We will work with other coun-
tries to eliminate terrorist groups, terrorist acts and 
cross-border terrorism.
7. Congress will work to repair India’s international 
image that has been damaged by the present govern-
ment’s intolerance of dissent and suppression of 
human rights.
8. Congress recognises that national security is not 
enhanced by chest-thumping or exaggerated claims 
but by quiet attention to our borders and resolute 
defence preparedness. We will work to restore the 
status quo ante on our borders with China and to 
ensure that areas where both armies patrolled in the 
past are again accessible to our soldiers. We will take 
the necessary steps to adjust our policy towards China 
until this is achieved.
40

9. Congress will pay greater attention to our immediate 
neighbours. We will re-establish the primacy of our 
special relationships with Nepal and Bhutan and 
strengthen them to our mutual benefit. We will enhance 
economic and cultural relations between India and 
Bangladesh that are the two most populous countries in 
South Asia. We will work with Sri Lanka to restore the 
political and commercial relations between the two 
countries and help Sri Lanka resolve its political issues 
especially with the Tamils. We will repair relations with 
the Maldives and work with Myanmar to protect the 
political and human rights of the people of Myanmar.
10. Engagement with Pakistan depends fundamentally 
on its willingness and ability to end cross-border 
terrorism.
11. Congress will significantly increase the size of the 
Indian Foreign Service, open more missions abroad, 
leverage our economic strengths, and acquire a 
position of leadership through the country’s values and 
mutually beneficial economic relationships.
12. We will revive the position of a Minister of State 
handling overseas Indians within the External Affairs 
Ministry to provide this important constituency with a 
one-stop window to address their concerns.
41

ENVIRONMENT
Environment, Climate Change and Disaster Management
Congress re-affirms its profound commitment to rapid, inclusive and sustainable development, and to protect its 
ecosystems, local communities, flora and fauna. We recall that it was Prime Minister Indira Gandhi who first put in 
place the laws, regulations and institutions for that purpose. The National Action Plan on Climate Change was 
prepared under the leadership of Prime Minister Manmohan Singh. Despite the BJP’s misinformed criticism of the 
Action Plan, the BJP/NDA government subsequently acknowledged its relevance and validity. However, there have 
been several departures from the previous policies and important components such as environment protection, 
forest conservation, biodiversity preservation, coastal zone regulation, wetlands protection and protection of tribal 
rights have been weakened.
Air pollution and water pollution continue to extract a heavy toll on public health. Livelihoods are being destroyed in 
tribal and ecologically sensitive areas.
Congress will address the issues of environment and climate change with the seriousness they deserve.
1. We will constitute an independent Environment 
Protection and Climate Change Authority to establish, 
monitor and enforce environmental standards and to 
enforce the National and State Climate Change plans.
2. We will launch a Green New Deal Investment 
Programme focused on renewable energy, sustainable 
infrastructure and the creation of green jobs.
3. We will strengthen the National Clean Air 
Programme in order to urgently tackle the problem of 
air pollution.
4. Congress will work with state governments to stop 
the discharge of effluents into the rivers and water 
bodies of India.
42

5. Congress will appoint a high-level committee to study 
the issue of landslides in the hill districts, evolve 
measures to prevent landslides and ensure citizens’ 
safety.
6. Congress will protect the coastal zones of the 
country. The coastal zones will be preserved without 
affecting the livelihood of fishing communities.
7. India experienced the biggest loss of forest cover 
after Brazil between 2015 and 2020. We will work with 
state governments to increase the forest cover, redefine 
‘forest’ and ‘forest cover’ in accordance with modern 
scientific standards, and involve local communities in 
afforestation.
8. Congress will provide clean cooking fuel at affordable 
prices to all households of the country. We will ensure 
that the use of LPG cylinders is increased from the 
current paltry average number of 3.7 per year among 
Ujjwala beneficiaries.
9. In order to facilitate the funding required for Green 
Transition and to achieve the goal of net zero by 2070, 
we will set up the Green Transition Fund of India 
together with state governments and the private sector. 
10. We will not limit disaster management to humans 
and will expand it to include other vulnerable lives such 
as wild animals, domestic animals, pets and livestock. 
11. We will increase the allocation to the National 
Adaptation Fund and review the guidelines for use of 
the Fund.
12. We will transition from the 2008 National Action 
Plan on Climate Change to a National Climate Resil-
ience Development Mission to ensure that all sectors 
of development provide protocols for action and 
measurable targets.
13. Conflicts between humans and wildlife have 
increased. We will intervene and find solutions that are 
specific to the areas of conflict.
1. Congress will expand the remit of the Ministry of Jal 
Shakti and bring all water-related activities and depart-
ments under one authority.
2. We will implement a nationwide plan to provide 
potable water in all cities, towns and village 
panchayats.
WATER MANAGEMENT
AND SANITATION
India has 18 per cent of the world’s population but 
only 4 per cent of water resources. Climate change 
and an erratic monsoon have added to the water 
stress felt by farmers, industries, consumers and 
others.
43

3. Water harvesting will be made mandatory. Desalina-
tion plants will be installed in all coastal areas. The use 
of recycled water will be promoted for non-drinking and 
industrial purposes.
4. Congress will pay special attention to access to 
water and democratic sharing of water. We will 
address these issues by focusing on storage in dams 
and water bodies, replenishing groundwater and 
creating a large participatory programme of water 
management involving the state governments, civil 
society organisations, farmers, panchayats and gram 
sabhas, and municipalities.
5. Our rivers are polluted because of the discharge of 
effluents into the rivers. Discharge of any kind of 
effluent into rivers will be prohibited by law. Pancha-
yats and municipalities will be required by law to devise 
and implement schemes for disposal of effluents and 
waste.
6. Congress will end the evil of manual scavenging. 
Every manual scavenger will be rehabilitated, re-skilled, 
provided a job and assured a life of dignity and safety. 
The Prohibition of Manual Scavenging Act, 2013, will 
be strictly implemented and any person employing 
anyone for manual scavenging shall be punished. We 
will provide compensation of 30 lakh to families of 
sanitation workers deceased while at work. We will 
allocate sufficient funds to enable the procurement of 
machines that will clean sewers and septic tanks, and 
remove human waste. Free insurance will be provided 
to all sanitation workers.
7. In collaboration with state governments, a compre-
hensive programme of underground drainage and safe 
disposal of sewage will be implemented in all towns 
and municipalities in 10 years.
44

The ten years of the BJP/NDA government have been marked by exaggeration and publicity rather than substance 
and performance. The economy has registered less-than-satisfactory growth. Widespread unemployment, high 
inflation and falling consumption have debilitated even this modest growth.
While the poor and the middle classes have been hit below the belt, the atmosphere in the country has become 
hate-filled and divisive. Constitutional values have been pushed to the background and majoritarianism has taken 
over.
Inequalities have widened. Every section of the people lives in fear.
What India and the Indian people need at this time is a decisive break from the path of the last ten years. The people 
yearn to walk on the road of all-round development, equality, equity, freedom and justice. Congress has the capability 
to provide the leadership to the people to walk on this new road.
The lessons of history are there before you. Congress delivered Independence. Congress laid the foundations of 
democracy. Congress steered the country’s economic development through the 1950s and 1960s. Congress govern-
ments fought the wars of 1965 and 1971 and protected the sovereignty and integrity of India. Congress brought 
about a paradigm change in 1991 and ushered in an era of impressive growth. In the last ten years, the Congress has 
been the bulwark against illiberalism and authoritarianism. Congress has stood with the people in their fight against 
injustice and oppressive laws.
Bearing in mind the lessons of history, the Congress appeals to you to repose your faith once again in the Indian 
National Congress.
We promise you greater freedom, faster growth, more equitable development and justice for all. We appeal to you to 
vote for the ‘Hand’ symbol and for the candidates of the Indian National Congress
It is time to remind ourselves of Tagore’s immortal words in Gitanjali:
 Where the mind is without fear and the head is held high
 Where knowledge is free
 Where the world has not been broken up into fragments
 By narrow domestic walls
 Where words come out from the depth of truth
 Where tireless striving stretches its arms towards perfection
 Where the clear stream of reason has not lost its way
 Into the dreary desert sand of dead habit
 Where the mind is led forward by thee
 Into ever-widening thought and action
 Into that heaven of freedom, my Father, let my country awake.
AN APPEAL
45

46

1
Qty : 3000
s